Luther on Christian Education.
LUTHER’S
CATECHETICAL WRITINGS
GOD’S CALL TO REPENTANCE, FAITH AND PRAYER
THE BIBLE PLAN OF SALVATION EXPLAINED BY LUTHER. TRANSLATED, WITH THE HELP OF OTHERS,
BY
PROF. JOHN NICHOLAS LENKER, D. D.
Author of “Lutherans in All Lands,” Translator of Luther’s Works Into English, and President of The National Lutheran Library Association.
VOL. I.
SECOND THOUSAND.
Luther
MINNEAPOLIS, MINN., U. S. A.
1907.
Copyright, 1907 by PROF. J. N. LENKER, D. D.
of (Bob’s ^Teachings.
Right Faith in God and True Love to Our Neighbor.
As set forth in the Catechism and in this volume.
Ten Words of God to Man.	Ten Words of Man in Reply.
(Bofc’s Commandments*1	XTbe Bpostles’ Creed.2
First Table of the Law.	True Faith in the Triune God;
Our Love and Duty to God.	Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
1.	I am Jehovah thy God.	1. I believe in God the Fath-
Thou shalt have no other gods er Almighty, maker of heaven before me.	and earth.
2.	Thou shalt not take the	2. I believe in Jesus Christ
name cf Jehovah thy God in	my Lord (etc.), who came from
vain-; for Jehovah will not hold	heaven to reveal God’s name to
him	guiltless that taketh his	me by his teachings, death and
name in vain.	i	resurrection.	.
3.	Remember the Sabbath '	3. I believe in the Holy Spir-
day to keep it holy. (Thou shalt	it (etc.), for whose work of ap-
sanctify the holy-day or rest-	plying Christ’s redemption the
day.)	' holy-day has been set apart.
Second Table of the Law. ^ QhC SLOtb’S H>ra£et\3
Our Love and	Duty to Man.	Seven Petitions Christ Taught.
4.	Honor thy father and thy	4.	Our	Father who art in
mother.	heaven, hallowed be thy name.
5.	Thou	shalt not kill.	5.	Thy	Kingdom (of grace
and life) come.
6.	Thou	shalt not commit	6.	Thy	will (and not the will
adultery.	of the flesh) be done (in me).
7. Thou shalt not steal.	rkf' 7. Give us this day our daily
^ bread. (Then we need not steal.)
3.	Thou	shalt not bear false i, 8.	And	forgive us our debts,
witness against thy neighbor. '"■' as we forgive our debtors.
9.	Thou	shalt not covet thy	9.	And	lead us not into
neighbor’s house.	temptation.
10.	Thou shalt not covet r 10. But deliver us from evil, anything that is thy neighbor’s.
For I Jehovah thy God am a ^ For thine is the kingdom and jealous God, visiting the iniqui- $■ the power and the glory for ty of the fathers (etc).	' ever and ever. Amen.
^‘The Word of the Lord abideth for ever.” 1 Peter 1, 25.
2“Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.” Matt 16, 16.
3“God is a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship in spirit and truth.” John 4, 24.
Meditate upon the relations of these words o£ God and of man to each other. God commands, man believes and prays. Luther says, “The Ten Commandments are the doctrine of doctrines, the Apostles’ Creed the creed of creeds, and the Lord’s Prayer the prayer of prayers. God the Father gave the Ten Commandments; Christ dictated	the very	words	of the Lord’s Prayer; and	I believe the words	of the	Apostles’	Creed to be inspired by the	Holy
Spirit.” The Trinitarian is the only true conception of God. Here we have the will of the Father, the redemption of the Son and the work of the Holy Spirit. The Lord’s Prayer repeats and includes the Commandments and the Creed in prayer. “Wherever the Holy Spirit is there is nothing but prayer.” The first part of the Catechism awakens fear, the second love, the third trust. Try to obey, try to believe, try to pray.
Dedication.
To parents and teachers, pastors and authors, Sunday schools and young peoples’ societies, and all Protestants interested in developing a better system of Christian instruction, supplementary to that of the public schools, this volume is in love, faith and hope prayerfully Dedicated.
Having completed the first English translation of the five volumes of Luther’s Church Postil on the Gospel texts of the Church Year, we now turn to his no less valuable Catechetical Writings. From the pulpit to the school is the change, but it is the same Luther—the same truths and principles. Luther’s school and pulpit did not conflict; the one strengthened the other. Both were Christo-centric. After four hundred years of test and service, his homiletical and pedagogical writings are still in daily service as Protestant classics, in Germany, Denmark, Norway and Sweden; also in Finland, Russia, Austria, and wherever the Hanseatic Germans and the Viking Scandinavians have settled, and that is almost everywhere. It is their pulpits and schools that have made these peoples the power they are in the world today. Luther and Me-lanchthon dominate the Germans, Luther and Rosenius the Swedes, Luther and Haugc the Norwegians, Luther, Grundvigt and Wilhelm Beck the Danes.
Religion and Education.
Religion is the great need of the child, and education is the instinct of the parent. Both religion and education are as old as the race. In the future, as in the past, one will influence the other. Religion has at different times, as among the Jews, the early Christians and the first Protestants, determined the character of the domestic, social and political life of civilized countries. In ancient and modern times the servants of religion have often been the educating class. The education cf Europe and America is not merely religious, but is Christian. Their Christian missions plant the school alongside the church. An irreligious school is a misnomer. At the present time in our own country the perplexing problem of teaching religion has little or no place in our public schools, while in those of Germany nineteen hours each week are set apart for religion. Time will no doubt develop a system of education that will neglect no part of man’s nature, but “will train the young to be strong, intelligent and, above all, righteous men and women.”
Luther and Melanchthon, Two Witnesses, Agree.
Luther in founding the Protestant church, school and library was mere than a humanist and a realist; he was a Christian. In his pedagogical writings he had in mind a comprehensive system of education:	(1)	the primary schools (2) the secondary schools and
(3) the universities. “In schools of all kinds,” he says, “the chief and most common lesson should be in the Scriptures.”

Foreword.

6
LUTHER ON CHRISTIAN EDUCATION.
Melanchthon, the preceptor of Germany, who called Luther a miracle among men,” substantially agreed with Luther’s educational views. Of primary pupils, he says:	“They shall first learn
to read the primer, in which are found the alphabet, the Lord s Prayer, the Creed and other Prayers.” Of second grade pupils he says, “The teacher shall hear the whole grade, one after another, repeat the Lord’s Prayer, the Creed and the Ten Commandments. Afterwards lie shall explain these in a simple and proper manner, whereby the children may thoroughly understand the fear of God, faith and good works, which are necessary to an upright life. He shall require them to learn a few easy Psalms in which are contained the principles of a holy life. These principles dominate nearly all the Protestant schools of the continent of
Europe today.	.	.	.
Books like “The History of Education, by Prof. Painter, give Luther and Melanchthon their true place in the education of the world and show that they, like most great educators, carefully guarded against the evil of our day, that of overburdening the child with too many studies. In our modern Bible teaching, has not one difficulty been that the instruction has been too general and covered too much ground without any unity and system? A good textbook is needed in any school to teach religion as well as mathematics or any other study. Think of the confusion in teaching the various branches of secular education by distributing weekly leaflets on history, mathematics and the sciences.	10n,	nn.
In the “American Educational Review” of September, 1907, on*, writes- “The United States can receive an object lesson from Emperor William of Germany. There the government has passed a law affirming emphatically the necessity of dogmatic religious instruction in the schools supported by the state. Every teacher is required to have a thorough knowledge of his religion, the tenets of which he is to teach in the school attended by the church of that denomination.” The school textbook on the Christian religion in official and continuous use in Germany and among 60,000,000 Protestants on the continent of Europe for 400 years, with an evergrowing popularity, is worthy of examination from a pedagogica viewpoint by the Christian teachers of America.
HISTORY OF THE CATECHISMS.
The first step in the production of Luther’s Catechisms was taken by the state. John, the Elector of Saxony, gave the occasion. While at Torgau he issued on Trinity Sunday, 1527, the order for a tour of inspection to be made among the churches of his lan . Luther was appointed for the task, to be assisted by Justus Jonas and Bu^enha^en. He entered upon his duties the same year and continued through the year following. The instructions reqmred an inspection of the doctrine of the teachers and the taught as well as their daily walk and life The Elector desired a so to learn whether the people were reahy grateful ior the Gospel light risen in their midst. The condition of the country as Luther found it was far worse than he had expected. Among the People, pastors and teachers, he discovered the greatest blindness and ignorance concerning faith and the plan of salvation, as he testifies in the Drefsce to his Small Cfitcchism.
In 1529 he wrote to George Spalatin:	“The Church everywhere
presents a very sad picture. The peasants know nothing and fearn nothing; they never pray, and they simply abuse their liberty
LUTHER'S SMALL CATECHISM.
7
by wholly neglecting confession and the Lord’s Supper. They act as if they had no religious obligations. They have cast off the Papal religion and disgraced ours. The sight of the mismanagement by Papal bishops is something awful.”
This spiritual wretchedness touched Luther’s heart, and he felt it a duty to do his utmost to bring eternal salvation to these poor souls. To this end he wrote his two Catechisms. His first intention, it seems, was to write only one Catechism, for the children and the uninformed. But it naturally grew in his hands, until his practical wisdom suggested the issuing of it in a condensed form. The Large Catechism, under the title of “German Catechism” appeared first in April, 1522,. and the Small Catechism in July or August of the same year. The second is a condensation and not an expansion of the first.
The First Printed Catechism.
The first or original edition of the Small Catechism is unknown. No doubt every copy went to pieces from use in the schools. The oldest edition extant bears the title:	“Enchiridion.	The Small
Catechism for the Ordinary Pastor and Preacher, Enlarged and Improved by Martin Luther. Wittenberg.” At the end were the words, “Printed at Wittenberg by Nickel Schirlentz, 1529.	15 half
forms, 16mo.” Before each commandment, each article of the Creed and each petition of the Lord’s Prayer a full page wood cut appears. After the title, which has a border, follows immediately the ordinary preface. Before each of the three chief parts is a special title in a border. The Appendix consisted of “Morning and Evening Prayers,” “Prayers at Meals” and “The Table of Duties,” “The Form for Marriage” (Traubuechlein), “The Form for Baptism” (Taufbuechlein), “How the People Should be Taught to Confess,” and the German Litany, with which are notes for singing, the appendix ending with some prayers. All these parts of this appendix are from Luther. The fourth and fifth parts on Baptism and the Lord’s Supper are wanting in the first editions.
So at first the Small Catechism had only three chief parts, the Commandments, Creed and Lord’s Prayer. These were in use among the Papists during the middle ages and before the Reformation, and yet that great darkness and blindness existed appears not only from the catechetical writings and the deliberations of the church conventions of those days, but also from the testimony of Luther himself in the short preface to his Large Catechism and the preface to his “Short Form for Meditation on the Commandments, Creed and Lord’s Prayer.”
These three parts, which were in the hands of the people, Luther took as the foundation of his work, and presented them, explained in a different form, adding two additional parts, on Baptism and the Lord’s Supper. Thus developed the Small Catechism as we have it today. Just before the part on the Lord’s Supper, Luther inserted “How to Teach People to Confess Their Sins,” but he never considered it as a sixth part, nor did he ever consider “The Office of the Keys” a part of either Catechism. “The Office of the Keys” appeared first in “Nuremberg Sermons for Children,” in 1533, which became an appendix to the Brandenburg Agenda. Brenz, considered its author, printed it, in 1535, in his Catechism.
The First and Best School Text-Book On the Protestant Religion.
It is a significant fact, v/orthy of careful thought at the present
8
LUTHER ON CHRISTIAN EDUCATION.
time and here in America, that the oldest school text-book on the Christian religion is the one most universally used in Protestant schools of the world today. It has held its place for about 400 years and is used by 75,000,000 people at the present time, and its influence is growing. The reason for this popularity is its simplicity and the well balanced Christianity it represents. It first teaches God’s Commandments, thus calling people to a knowledge of their sins and to repentance. Then it teaches the Gospel, the knowledge of their Saviour, and calls to faith in him. The third part calls them to prayer, the perpetual exercise of faith. Then follow the two sacraments:	Baptism, by which the Christian life
is imparted to us; and the Lord’s Supper, by which it is nourished.
In different countries and at different times, as is the case in different periods of the lives of individuals, one or two or three of these five parts have been overemphasized and the others neglected. Some study and advocate the Ten Commandments to the neglect of the other parts, ar.d their religion becomes legalistic; others emphasize only faith, and they become overevangelical; others prayer, and become too subjective and neglect the objective Word; some are very particular about observing Baptism and neglect the Lord’s Supper, while others claim to understand the meaning of the Holy Supper, but do not fully appreciate the meaning of the covenant of Baptism.
The psychological basis of Luther’s catechisms and his writings on Christian education is “fear, love and trust.”
What our country and the world need today is a well balanced, intelligent and Biblical Christianity, a Christianity with an equilibrium and an adequate ballast for the stormy voyage of life. Where should the foundations of such a Christianity be laid? In the school. But no education that neglects to teach any one of these five parts of a grand whole will ever impart it. Whatever tendency the discussion of the Christian education problem may take in America, all these five parts should be required and developed. Each and all pertain to our people in general, as they did to the Jewish or Christian people generally, and not merely to each individual. This is one of the beautiful and strong characteristics of this text-book. Its contents are divine. God is the author of the words of the Ten Commandments, the Apostles’ Creed, the Lord’s Prayer, Hoiy Baptism and the Lord’s Supper. Luther wrote none of them, neither did the Pope, nor Calvin nor Wesley. Our contention is that we should hold with a death-grip to the scriptural words of these the five greatest things taught us in the Old and New Testaments, and should develop our Christian character and life on no other foundation, availing ourselves of the help of all the best literature on these five themes written since the days of the apostles.
After examining the growing literature on the subject of Christian education, one feels its occasion, importance and blessing to be unquestioned, and all recognize there is no lack of material to teach. The two questions seem to be: first, as to standards, hoy/ to so systematize the material that the child may learn what is most beneficial; and secondly, as to methods, how to impart it. If the first work were satisfactorily done, the second would be easy. To do the first it is necessary to give the people the true idea of a Catechism, the text-book for teaching the child religion. The text and all the thoughts of this Christian Catechism are drawn from God’s Word; and are not the thoughts of the leader of a
LUTHER’S SMALL CATECHISM.
9
religious denomination. It is not a good sign when people of Protestant lands, who owe more to the Catechism than to any other book except the Bible, neglect it.
SUPERIOR CHARACTER OF THE FIRST CATECHISM.
As to contents, style and arrangement, Luther’s Small Catechism, written before the various Protestant denominations arose must be regarded as a model. Its plan includes all that the t nature and aim of a Catechism require. It contains all the facts and doctrines of faith one must know to believe in Cnnst and be saved. Only subjects and matter pertaining to the fundamentals of faith were chosen. The selection was made with a view not only to faith, but also to practice, since true faith must be active through love and the one cannot be separated from the other. This Luther clearly and thoroughly set forth in his explanations. Both teachings are necessary to a useful and edifying Catechism. It serves the children and unlearned people by giving their teachers a plan for imparting instruction in the clearest way. To simplicity Luther added thoroughness, and founded all his catechetical teachings upon the Scriptures as their sure and foundation. Knowing that as they were the only rule of faithi and life so were they the one fountain whence issued all tha. the catechism contained. Nothing was considered true unless it agreed
VV Thf arrangement is fme. The five parts are knit together as the nature of the work requires; the general aim and object ot the Catechism being plainly to teach the plan of salvat ?n-starts with the viewpoint of man’s state before the fall. Had man fulfilled the law and net committed a single sin, he would then have been saved. At this point the first part of the Catechism K0ms the Ten Commandments. If we do not fulfil the Law w. mu t expect destruction. Failing therein we have to acknowledge our great guilt, come to the foot of the cross, to Christ and accept his fulfillment of the Law as our refuge. Alter the fall God instituted a covenant of grace with man, and in harmony with his wisdom, righteousness and mercy was pleased to oraain a new plan of^sal vation, whereby everyone who truly beneved in ^esus and persevered in that faith to the end would secure the righteousness availing before God and be saved. Hence the second part, the Creed presenting the articles of faith, wherein is included the doctrine o true saving faith. Such faith is, however, no human work, but a work of grace, a favor and gift of God, for which we must pray arid entreat; hence the third part, prayer. But Goa does net airec.^> and without visible means kindle, strengthen and preserve he operates through the means of grace, such as the Sacram-nt... Therefore Luther added the fourth and fifth parts, Baptism and
thTheCprefacesPLuther wrote to both Catechisms cannot be read without interest and profit. We see m them how highly he valued his Catechisms, a hint we may make use of in our times, ±s«ier, Schilter, Brochmand, Schamel and others have m their catechetical writings referred to the admirable order of the parteo, our C;ate-chisms, an arrangement following the method of Baptist and the Apostles m respect to beginning with repentance
and following with faith.	___
Ever since the Reformation, wherever the Small Catechism has been known, it has received the highest commendation alik~ fro*
10
LUTHER ON CHRISTIAN EDUCATION.
teachers and pastors as an unrivaled pedagogical document. Some objections to it have, of course, been raised, but they have been promptly refuted, with the result that the Catechism has been more highly appreciated than before.
As has been mentioned, the Catechism is truly a glorious book, and it has always been held in the greatest esteem. As soon as published it was introduced into the churches and schools. It seems Melanchthon was careful for this, for in the Apology to the Augsburg Confession, he writes:	“Among the rules observed by
pastors and servants of the church is that of teaching the children publicly and at home in God’s Word. The Catechism is no child’s play, like carrying flags and candles, but a very profitable instruction.” In 1580 Elector August of Saxony ordered that no Catechism should be used in the churches and schools except that which Luther printed, and that every Sunday it be read in the village churches btfore the Gospel lesson—the whole Catechism, except the explanation.
That it was very popular is proved by its many editions. Mathe-sius, in his “Six Sermons on the Life of Luther,” writes: “God be praised, over a hundred thousand copies have been printed in our generation, and in all languages, and large quantities have found their way to foreign lands.” Wherever the Augsburg Confession was accepted by the parents, this book was taught to their children. At the present time, two or three million children study it every year, and about a million new copies are printed, sold and studied annually. No book except the Bible has had a larger and steadier growth in circulation throughout the world.
TRANSLATED INTO MANY LANGUAGES.
Both Catechisms were first written in the German language. Translations of the Small Catechism at once followed:	(1) In
Latin, by John Lonicer, at Marburg, the same year the German edition appeared. (2) In Greek, by different ones. Besides that by Joachim Camerarius, one by M. Neander, at Basel, in 1564. Among others, one at Leipzig, in 1577. It was also issued in Greek verse.
(3)	In Hebrew, by John Clajus, of Nordhausen, who printed the Catechism in four languages—German, Latin, Greek and Hebrew. In 1599 Conrad Neander revised the translation and printed it at Wittenberg. (4) In Arabian, by Dr. Callenburg, at Halle, in 1729. (5) In the Wend language, by Primus Truber. (6) In the Malabar language, in southern East India, by Ziegenbalg, who translated it in 1707 and printed it in 1713. Schultze, another Danish-Halle missionary at Tranquebar, translated it into the language of the Brahman priests. Besides these translations, this wonderful book has been printed in Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, French, Italian, Spanish, Magyarian, Bohemian, Slovakian, Polish, Russian, Icelandic, Lapp, American Indian, and English. Next to the Bible it is the best text-book for heathen mission work. It has been translated into 70 languages and dialects for missionary purposes, viz.: Asiatic, 35; African, 24; Australian, 8; and American, 3.
The influence of this little book appears also in the vast catechetical literature it has called forth in many languages. It was the instigation and the basis of many other Protestant catechisms, and even of the Catholic Catechism at the Council of Trent. Melanchthon, in the Apology to the Augsburg Confession, says there was not a trace of catechetical instruction among the Catholics, though their church laws prescribed it. The Catholics can thank
LUTHER’S SMALL CATECHISM.
II
Luther for their catechism as well as for their confession. God blessed this little book to friend and foe. It displaced the legends and Bridget prayers.
THE TESTIMONY OF SCHOLARS PRAISES IT.
The words spoken by great men in its praise testify to its value. Mathesius writes:	“If Dr. Luther had done nothing more in his
life than introduce for practical use the Catechism into the homes, schools and pulpits, the world could never thank him enough nor pay him for his services.”
John Wigand writes:	“Luther’s Small Catechism possesses all
the commendable and beautiful features of a book for introductory or elementary Christian instruction:	An	experienced and distin-
guished author; exalted and divine themes; the pure truth; clearness of expression; brevity, unity and harmony of arrangement in all its parts; the best resuits and a great mission; and finally the approval of all intelligent people.”	.
Conrad Porta writes: “This Catechism, small and unpretentious as it appears, presents in wonderful brevity the whole plan of our salvation more clearly than many large volumes full of confusing questions and of discordant and Godless matter; and it presents that plan in such perfection that the gates of hell and all enemies and heretics united cannot prevail against it.”
Seckendorf writes, in his celebrated “History of Lutheranism,” Vol. 2, p. 145: “Luther’s Small Catechism is unequaled in purity of doctrine and spirit, as readers who do not obstinately oppose the truth may themselves see and be convinced. Especially does his explanation of the Apostles’ Creed surpass all previous efforts. Then the short but most powerful exposition of the Lord’s Prayer is evidence enough to quiet the slander declaring that Luther wished to impose upon the Church only faith—a dead faith merely confessed in word and without power to sanctify the life; or that, according to his teaching, the bare knowledge that Christ’s merits are imputed to us is sufficient for salvation.”
“As one makes a fragrant bouquet from little flowers, so is the Catechism a bouquet composed of precious, fragrant flowers of life from the pleasure garden of God’s Word. And as we make an expensive and powerful medicine from various kinds of plants, so is the Catechism a precious and potent remedy for the souls of both children and adults.”—John Arndt.
Another sajss:	“The	Catechism was not written by	Luther, but
by the Holy	Spirit. I	will glory in the Catechism as	Luther did
in the Psalter. It seems to me the Holy Spirit took upon himself the task of composing a small Bible, that those who could not read the whole Bible might have nearly all its substance here in a small book.”
“Luther’s Catechism is a small book costing only about six cents, but six thousand worlds could not buy it if it were estimated at its real value.”—Justus Jonas.
Friedrich, Duke of Silesia, requested to be buried with the Catechism in	his	hand.	Joachim, Prince of Anhalt, wrote with his
own hand in	his	copy:	“Next to the Bible this is my	best book.”
Sabine, Elector of Brandenburg, said: “Luther will indeed remain Luther, and no one will soon equal him. My children shall learn his Catechism. When they have understood it aright, they have learned enough.”
LUTHER’S WORDS ON THE CATECHISM.
The Catechism must govern the Church and remain the ruling
12
LUTHER ON CHRISTIAN EDUCATION.
authority; that is, the Ten Commandments, the Creed, the Lord’s Prayer and the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord’s Supper. Although many oppose it, yet it shall stand firm and hold the first place through him of whom it is written, “Thou art a priest forever,” and who will also have priests, despite the devil and all his instruments on earth.
Sermons very little edify children and they learn little from them. It is more necessary for them to be instructed in schools and examined at home concerning what they have learned. The latter method is of great profit to them. It is very wearisome, but very necessary. The Papists avoid such pains, their children being neglected and forsaken.
In the Catechism we have a very true, direct and short way to the whole Christian religion. God himself gave the Ten Commandments; Christ dictated and taught the very words of the Lord’s Prayer, and I believe the words of the Apostles’ Creed to be inspired by the Holy Spirit. No one but the Holy Spirit could have enumerated things so sublime, in terms so definite, expressive and powerful. No human being may have achieved it; no, not all the humanity of ten thousand worlds. This Creed, then, should receive our constant and most serious attention. For myself I cannot too intensely admire or venerate it.
The Catechism is the best and most complete doctrine on record, and therefore should continually be preached. All public sermons should be based upon it. I would that we preached it daily, and distinctly read it out of the book. But our proachers and hearers have it at their tongues’ end. They have swallowed it all. They are ashamed of this trivial and simple doctrine, as they hold it to be, and desire to be accounted more learned. The parishioners say:	“Our preachers fiddle always one tune; they preach nothing
but the Ten Commandments, the Creed, the Lord’s Prayer, Baptism and the Lord’s Supper, all of which we know well enough now.” But the Catechism, I insist, is the true layman’s Bible. It contains the sum of Christian doctrine necessary for every Christian to know in order to be saved.
First, there are the Ten Commandments of God, the doctrine of all doctrines, whereby we know God’s will—what he requires cf us and what we lack.
Secondly, there is the confession of faith in God and in our Lord Jesus Christ, of all histories the most sublime, wherein are delivered to us the wonderful works of the Divine Majesty from the beginning to eternity; how we and all creatures are created by God; how we are delivered by the Son of God through his humanity, his passion, death and resurrection; and also how we are renewed and assembled as the one people of God, and have remission of sins and everlasting life.
Thirdly, there is the Lora's Prayer, the prayer above all prayers, the prayer taught us by the divine Master, comprehending all spiritual and temporal blessings and affording the strongest comfort in every trial, temptation and trouble, even in the hour of death.
Fourthly, there are the blessed Sacraments, the chief of ceremonies, which God himself instituted and ordained, therein assuring us cf his grace.
We should esteem and love the Catechism, for it is the ancient, pure, divine doctrine of the Christian Church. Whatever conflicts with it is new and false doctrine, however glorious its aspect, and we must beware how we treat it. In all my youth I never heard
LUTHER’S SMALL CATECHISM.
13
any preaching of the Ten Commandments or of the Lord’s Prayer.
Further heresies will darken this light, but now we have the Catechism, God be praised, purer in the pulpits than has been for the last thousand years. From all the books of the fathers could not be collected so much as, by God’s grace, is now taught out of the little Catechism.
CONTENTS OF THIS VOLUME.
Plan of Salvation Explained by Luther.
Including a System of Christian Education and Christian Reading. A key to the study of Luther’s writings and of the Bible, containing the following eight books or distinct documents of Luther, unabridged and newly translated from the classic educational writings of the hero of the Reformation. With the text of the American Revised Bible.
1.	Luther’s Small Catechism.
2. Luther’s Large Catechism.	*
3. Luther’s Explanation of God’s Ten Commandments.
4.	Luther’s Explanation of the Apostles’ Creed.
5.	Luther’s Explanation of the Lord’s Prayer.
6.	Luther’s Explanation of Holy Baptism.
7.	Luther’s Explanation of Confession.
8.	Luther’s Explanation of the Lord’s Supper.
Under each commandment and petition of the Lord’s Prayer are references for readings in Luther’s writings and the Bible, which make the volume a key to Luther and to the Bible. This volume is more than a devotional book for home reading. It is a popular Text Book on the Christian Religion under seven grades, for Parochial Schools, Academies, Colleges, Sunday School Classes, Prayer Meetings and Young People’s Meetings.
A NEW OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN PEDAGOGY AND READING, BASED ON THE CHRISTIAN TEACHING OF OUR CHILDHOOD.
Opening this volume at any place the reader will meet with very familiar truths. But do net, therefore, lay the book aside. This familiar, scriptural knowledge is what will make it to you “a life companion,” for instruction and devotion, for reference and for systematizing the Christian knowledge and experience you will gain through life, from parent, teacher, preacher and the disciples of Christ, v/hen mother is teacher, and father preacher, v/hen the teacher is preacher, and the preacher a teacher. The teacher and the taught should make constant progress, step by step, from one grade to another. To guard against confusion or the lack of system in the important life work of developing Christian character, the following grades of instruction are offered for consideration, suggestion and adoption. Remember the Catechism is not Luther’s teaching, BUT GOD’S.
First Grade. The words of Scripture in the five parts of Luther’s Small Catechism, with Morning and Evening Prayers and Grace at the Table. Exact language of the text.
Second Grade. Luther’s explanation of the Scripture in the five parts of the Small Catechism, with several Hymns and the Table of Duties. Exact language of the text.
14
LUTHER ON CHRISTIAN EDUCATION.
Third Grade. Any standard explanation of Luther’s Small Catechism, adopted by your congregation, with a good Bible History, Old Testament and Hymns.
Fourth Grade. Luther’s Large Catchism, with Bible History, New Testament and Hymns.
Fifth Grade. One of Luther’s best writings on each of the five parts of the Catechism, as those given in this volume.
Sixth Grade. A study of the Bible passages bearing on each part of the Catechisms, as given in the references under the topics of the Large Catechism in this volume.
Seventh Grade. A study of Luther’s writings on these thoughts and pasages, as given in the references under the topics in the Large Catechism of this volume.
Supplementary Reading in Church History and Luther’s Writings.
I.	Church History. (1) From the Apostles to the Reformation.
(2)	Reformation History. (3) Reformation to the present time.
(4)	Universal missions.
II.	Luther’s Writings. (1) Church Postil on the Gospels. (2) Church Postil on the Epistles. (3) Commentary on Galatians and St. Peter’s Epistles. (4) Commentary on the First Twenty-tv/o Psalms. (5) Luther’s best reformatory writings. (6) His best writings opposing false tendencies in Protestantism. (7) Luther’s Commentary on Genesis.
READINGS IN LUTHER.
Luther readers soon acquire a system or plan of reading that makes what otherwise seems to be a task, a real pleasure. The greatest benefit is received when they study the eminent Luther literature from the standpoint of the Catechism and the Bible. The reason so many never read anything of Luther’s except the Small Catechism is because nothing is offered the child as a bridge from the Confirmation instruction to the practice of Postil reading by its parents. The Large Catechism and the treatise on the five parts offered in this volume aim to be that bridge. Luther’s Catechetical and Postil writings must always take first place in Lutheran devotional literature. This volume proposes to be the link to unite the two. The cry in the land, “Read Luther,” has brought the response, “What is the best way to read him?” That question this volume attempts to answer. The best explanation of the Small Catechism is the Large Catechism, a treasure of the Church that has been sadly neglected. The plan of giving all the Luther reading references under its various heads offers a Key to Luther’s v/ritings and connects the same with the Confirmation instructions. It is to be preferred to the plan adopted by the Walch edition, of scattering the references through the whole volume of Luther’s catechetical writings.
In both the Luther and the Bible readings attention was given to the proper connection between the first and the second, as well as the second and third, chief parts of the Catechism, showing the unity of the five parts and the Biblical character of the whole.
CATECHISM READINGS IN THE BIBLE.
Bible readings are popular in young people’s religious meetings. They often, however, lack system and are not consciously and harmoniously connected with the Bible knowledge already learned. This is here avoided by holding to the outline of the Catechisms,
LUTHER'S SMALL CATECHISM.
15
which in the end will bring better results if connected with the Bible references of the Confirmation class. These should not be forgotten nor ignored.	.
Since in the main Luther’s writings are explanatory of Bible texts, if one knows the proof passages on different subjects, he can readily turn to Luther’s complete writings on a given text and kindred subjects. Indexes for references will be issued in English in time. It is always important to keep the connection between Luther and the Bible. The Bible readings assist the Luther readings, and vice versa. The Luther readings should lead us into a deeper and a more systematic study of the Bible.
If the reader selects a thought from Luther or the Bible and locates it in this volume, he will find here a key to other thoughts in the same line. This book, as a double key to Luther and the Bible from the classified contents of the Catechism, aims to be a life companion for pastors and teachers, parents and children. The Catechism is all taken from the Bible, and its contents dominated Luther’s life and writings. He lived his Catechism.
The practice of employing a good reference Bible and reading the context and other references there cited, should be early acquired and never abandoned. It is more profitable than reading the complete text without references. Once anchored by the Catechism, stay anchored by it.
The Bible references are selected with care from the standard German, Scandinavian and English explanations of the Small Catechism. A little attention has been given to certain practical subjects, as missions.
The number 24 on the back of this volume refers to its number in the “Standard Edition of Luther’s Works in English.” Nearly all the references in the “Luther Readings” will be found in the first 15 volumes of the “Standard Edition of Luther’s Works in English,” now in preparation for the press.
The text of the American Revised Bible has been followed in this as in the other volumes. It seems unwise and unpractical for German and Scandinavian children to learn the old version and then change to the new, which is growing in favor in Sunday schools and young people’s societies.
Grateful acknowledgement is hereby cheerfully made to the following co-laborers for their valuable assistance: To Prof. G. H. Schodde, Ph.D., for translating “The Law, Faith and Prayer”; to Prof. A. G. Voigt, D.D., for translating “The Lord’s Prayer Explained,” and to Rev. C. B. Gohdes for translating “The Benefits of the Lord’s Supper,” and for revising copy and reading proof.
This work is now offered as a humble contribution to the meager Christian pedagogical and catechetical literature in the English language, with the hope that it may in the years to come aid in developing an American system of Christian education, the basis of which will be God’s Ten Commandments, the Faith of the Apostles and the Prayer our Lord taught his disciples.
J. N. LENKER.
Minneapolis, Minn., November 28th, 1907.
Luther's Small Catechism.
Foreword.
Martin Luther to all the faithful and godly pastors and preachers, grace, mercy and peace in Jesus Christ our Lord.
1.	The deplorable condition in which I found the religious affairs of your parishes on my recent visit of inspection has impelled me to publish this concise and simple Catechism. Merciful God, what wretched ignorance I beheld! The common people—especially in the villages—apparently have no knowledge whatever of Christian doctrine, and even many pastors are ignorant and incapable teachers.
Though all are called Christians and have the privilege • of the sacraments, yet they cannot even repeat the Lord’s Prayer, nor the Creed, nor the Ten Commandments. They live like the brutes, and having now the light of the Gospel, rankly abuse their Christian liberty.
2.	You bishops, what answer will you be able to make to Christ for having so shamefully neglected the people and utterly disregarded your office ? But I invoke no evil upon you. You withhold the Holy Supper in part, and insist upon the observance of your own traditions, while utterly indifferent about teaching the people the Lord’s Prayer, the Creed, the Ten Commandments or any part of the Word of God. Woe, woe unto you!
I beseech you, then, in the name of God, my beloved brethren—pastors or preachers—to sincerely discharge the duties of your office, to have pity on the people entrusted to your care, and to help us to acquaint them with the Cate- 
16
LUTHER’S SMALL CATECHISM.
17
chism, especially the young. And if you have not the requisite knowledge of such things take these forms and read them to the people, word for word, proceeding in the following manner:	
3.	First, let the preacher particularly beware of variations in the form, or wording, of the Ten Commandments, the Lord’s Prayer, the Creed, the sacraments. Let him adhere to one form year after year. For the young and the unlearned cannot be taught with success unless we keep to the same forms and expressions. They are easily confused when we teach a thing in a certain form at one time, and at another time—as if endeavoring to improve it—employ a different version. In the latter way our labor and toil are lost.
The worthy fathers clearly recognized this fact. They used the same form for the Lord’s Prayer, the Creed and the Ten Commandments. We should likewise follow their plan in teaching the young and the unlearned, changing not one syllable nor varying in any wise tomorrow what we preach today.
4.	Choose, then, the form that you prefer and ever keep to it. When you preach to the learned and wise, however, you are at liberty to show your skill, and to present these articles in all the varied forms at your command. But with the young, keep ever to one form; and teach them, first of all, the Ten Commandments, the Creed, the Lord’s Prayer, etc., word for word according to the text, that thus they may easily repeat and remember them.
5.	If any refuse to learn, tell them that they deny Christ and are not Christians. They must not be admitted to the Lord’s Supper, nor to the privilege of being sponsors at infant baptism, nor enjoy any of our Christian liberties; they must be commended to the pope and his agents, and even to the devil himself. More than this, their parents and masters should refuse them food and drink and notify them that the government will banish such incorrigibles from the country.
Though we cannot and may not force any to believe, yet we must instruct and train the multitude to distinguish between right and wrong conduct toward those with whom
18
LUTHER ON CHRISTIAN EDUCATION.
they would live and obtain a livelihood. He who would dwell in the city and enjoy its privileges as blessings from God, must know and obey its laws, whether he truly believes or is a rogue and vicious at heart.
6.	In the second place, when those you instruct know the text well, teach them the meaning of the words. Take the explanation presented in these forms, or any other that is brief, and hold to it without altering a syllable, just as before with the words of the text; and allow ample time for the lessons. It is not necessary to take up all of a topic at once. For instance, when the people thoroughly understand the first commandment, take the second, and so on; otherwise they will be overburdened and retain nothing.
7.	In the third place, when you have finished the Small Catechism, begin with the Large Catechism and give the words a more comprehensive explanation. Explain each commandment, petition and article, with the various duties which they impose; teach the blessings and the dangers incident to its observance and neglect. These points you will find well treated in many writings. Emphasize particularly those parts most neglected or least understood by your people. For example, the seventh commandment, which deals with stealing, you must urge upon artisans, dealers and even upon farmers and servants, among whom many are dishonest and unfaithful. Likewise, you must faithfully instill the teaching of the fourth commandment upon children and the uneducated, that they may be quiet, faithful, obedient and peaceable; and illustrate this commandment by many examples from the Scriptures where God punished or blessed in accordance with its teaching.
8.	Here, too, urge magistrates and parents to rule wisely and to educate the children, reminding them of their bound-ing duty therein and of their grievous sin if they neglect it; for, failing in this respect, they do injury to God’s kingdom and to temporal government, making themselves the most harmful enemies of God and man. And make plain to them the awful wrong they commit when they refuse their aid in training children for the ministry and other professional
LUTHER’S SMALL CATECHISM.
19
spheres, and show that for such a sin God will send upon them terrible punishment. Time and place render preaching on this subject imperative. Parents and magistrates sin in this respect to an immeasurable degree; and Satan fosters their sin with most evil designs.
9.	Finally:	Now that the people are relieved of the
tyranny of the pope, they never come to the Lord’s Supper, but treat it with contempt. To this duty, then, they must be persuaded. However, we must not force any to believe or to partake of the Lord’s Supper; we must not make laws on this point or dictate time and place. But our preaching must influence the people to come and demand, as it were, that we give them the sacrament. To attain this influence, we must say to them: It is to be feared that he who does not desire to partake of the Lord’s Supper at least three or four times during the year, apparently despises it, and that he is no Christian at all; just as he who refuses to believe and hear the Gospel is not a Christian. For Christ did not say: “Neglect, or despise, this;” he said, “This do, as oft as ye drink it.” It is his command that the sacrament shall be observed. He will not have it despised or neglected. He says, “This do.”
10.	He who does not consider the Holy Supper of inestimable value, apparently knows no sin, no flesh, no devil, no world, no death, no danger, no hell; that is, he does not believe in them although he is overwhelmed in them and is completely the devil’s. On the other hand, he has no need of mercy, of life, of paradise and the kingdom of heaven, of Christ and God, nor of any good thing. For if he believed himself overwhelmed with evils and in need of so many blessings he could not neglect the Lord’s Supper, which gives effectual remedy for evil and bestows abundant good. He would not need to be driven to the sacrament by any law, but would hasten to it of his own accord, impelled by his own desires, and would urge you to administer it to him.
11.	Therefore, you must in this case establish no law, as the pope has done. Only set forth the benefit and the harm, the need and the blessing, the danger and the salvation, in-
20
LUTHER ON CHRISTIAN EDUCATION.
volved in the Lord’s Supper, and the people will seek it of their own accord and without constraint. If they refuse to come, leave them to their choice and tell them that since they regard not their own spiritual need and God’s gracious help, they belong to the devil. But if you do not so warn them, or if you turn the sacrament into a law, which means to inject poison into it, then you are to blame if the people despise the sacrament. Must they not of necessity be indifferent if you are asleep or silent on the matter? Therefore, take earnest heed, you pastors and preachers. Our office is utterly changed from what it was formerly, under the pope. It is now the ministry of salvation; consequently, it brings us greater responsibility and labor, more dangers and temptations. It brings us also but little gratitude or reward in this world; but Christ himself will be our reward if we faithfully labor. May the father of all grace help us, to whom be praise and thanks forever, through Christ our Lord. Amen.