# Luther's Small Catechism.

##Foreword.

Martin Luther to all the faithful and godly pastors and preachers, grace, mercy and peace in Jesus Christ our Lord.

1.	The deplorable condition in which I found the religious affairs of your parishes on my recent visit of inspection has impelled me to publish this concise and simple Catechism. Merciful God, what wretched ignorance I beheld! 
The common people—especially in the villages—apparently have no knowledge whatever of Christian doctrine, and even many pastors are ignorant and incapable teachers.

Though all are called Christians and have the privilege • of the sacraments, yet they cannot even repeat the Lord’s Prayer, nor the Creed, nor the Ten Commandments. They live like the brutes, and having now the light of the Gospel, rankly abuse their Christian liberty.

2.	You bishops, what answer will you be able to make to Christ for having so shamefully neglected the people and utterly disregarded your office?
But I invoke no evil upon you. 
You withhold the Holy Supper in part, and insist upon the observance of your own traditions, while utterly indifferent about teaching the people the Lord’s Prayer, the Creed, the Ten Commandments or any part of the Word of God.
Woe, woe unto you!

I beseech you, then, in the name of God, my beloved brethren—pastors or preachers—to sincerely discharge the duties of your office, to have pity on the people entrusted to your care, and to help us to acquaint them with the Catechism, especially the young.
And if you have not the requisite knowledge of such things take these forms and read them to the people, word for word, proceeding in the following manner:

3.	First, let the preacher particularly beware of variations in the form, or wording, of the Ten Commandments, the Lord’s Prayer, the Creed, the sacraments.
Let him adhere to one form year after year.
For the young and the unlearned cannot be taught with success unless we keep to the same forms and expressions.
They are easily confused when we teach a thing in a certain form at one time, and at another time—as if endeavoring to improve it—employ a different version.
In the latter way our labor and toil are lost.
The worthy fathers clearly recognized this fact.
They used the same form for the Lord’s Prayer, the Creed and the Ten Commandments.
We should likewise follow their plan in teaching the young and the unlearned, changing not one syllable nor varying in any wise tomorrow what we preach today.

4.	Choose, then, the form that you prefer and ever keep to it. 
When you preach to the learned and wise, however, you are at liberty to show your skill, and to present these articles in all the varied forms at your command.
But with the young, keep ever to one form; and teach them, first of all, the Ten Commandments, the Creed, the Lord’s Prayer, etc., word for word according to the text, that thus they may easily repeat and remember them.

5.	If any refuse to learn, tell them that they deny Christ and are not Christians. 
They must not be admitted to the Lord’s Supper, nor to the privilege of being sponsors at infant baptism, nor enjoy any of our Christian liberties; they must be commended to the pope and his agents, and even to the devil himself.
More than this, their parents and masters should refuse them food and drink and notify them that the government will banish such incorrigibles from the country.

Though we cannot and may not force any to believe, yet we must instruct and train the multitude to distinguish between right and wrong conduct toward those with whom they would live and obtain a livelihood.
He who would dwell in the city and enjoy its privileges as blessings from God, must know and obey its laws, whether he truly believes or is a rogue and vicious at heart.

6.	In the second place, when those you instruct know the text well, teach them the meaning of the words. Take the explanation presented in these forms, or any other that is brief, and hold to it without altering a syllable, just as before with the words of the text; and allow ample time for the lessons. It is not necessary to take up all of a topic at once. For instance, when the people thoroughly understand the first commandment, take the second, and so on; otherwise they will be overburdened and retain nothing.

7.	In the third place, when you have finished the Small Catechism, begin with the Large Catechism and give the words a more comprehensive explanation.
Explain each commandment, petition and article, with the various duties which they impose; teach the blessings and the dangers incident to its observance and neglect.
These points you will find well treated in many writings.
Emphasize particularly those parts most neglected or least understood by your people.
For example, the seventh commandment, which deals with stealing, you must urge upon artisans, dealers and even upon farmers and servants, among whom many are dishonest and unfaithful.
Likewise, you must faithfully instill the teaching of the fourth commandment upon children and the uneducated, that they may be quiet, faithful, obedient and peaceable; and illustrate this commandment by many examples from the Scriptures where God punished or blessed in accordance with its teaching.

8.	Here, too, urge magistrates and parents to rule wisely and to educate the children, reminding them of their bound-ing duty therein and of their grievous sin if they neglect it; for, failing in this respect, they do injury to God’s kingdom and to temporal government, making themselves the most harmful enemies of God and man.
And make plain to them the awful wrong they commit when they refuse their aid in training children for the ministry and other professional spheres, and show that for such a sin God will send upon them terrible punishment.
Time and place render preaching on this subject imperative. Parents and magistrates sin in this respect to an immeasurable degree; and Satan fosters their sin with most evil designs.

9. Finally:	Now that the people are relieved of the
tyranny of the pope, they never come to the Lord’s Supper, but treat it with contempt.
To this duty, then, they must be persuaded.
However, we must not force any to believe or to partake of the Lord’s Supper; we must not make laws on this point or dictate time and place.
But our preaching must influence the people to come and demand, as it were, that we give them the sacrament.
To attain this influence, we must say to them: It is to be feared that he who does not desire to partake of the Lord’s Supper at least three or four times during the year, apparently despises it, and that he is no Christian at all; just as he who refuses to believe and hear the Gospel is not a Christian.
For Christ did not say: “Neglect, or despise, this;” he said, “This do, as oft as ye drink it.” 
It is his command that the sacrament shall be observed.
He will not have it despised or neglected. He says, “This do.”

10.	He who does not consider the Holy Supper of inestimable value, apparently knows no sin, no flesh, no devil, no world, no death, no danger, no hell; that is, he does not believe in them although he is overwhelmed in them and is completely the devil’s.
On the other hand, he has no need of mercy, of life, of paradise and the kingdom of heaven, of Christ and God, nor of any good thing.
For if he believed himself overwhelmed with evils and in need of so many blessings he could not neglect the Lord’s Supper, which gives effectual remedy for evil and bestows abundant good.
He would not need to be driven to the sacrament by any law, but would hasten to it of his own accord, impelled by his own desires, and would urge you to administer it to him.

11.	Therefore, you must in this case establish no law, as the pope has done.
Only set forth the benefit and the harm, the need and the blessing, the danger and the salvation, involved in the Lord’s Supper, and the people will seek it of their own accord and without constraint.
If they refuse to come, leave them to their choice and tell them that since they regard not their own spiritual need and God’s gracious help, they belong to the devil.
But if you do not so warn them, or if you turn the sacrament into a law, which means to inject poison into it, then you are to blame if the people despise the sacrament.Must they not of necessity be indifferent if you are asleep or silent on the matter? Therefore, take earnest heed, you pastors and preachers.
Our office is utterly changed from what it was formerly, under the pope. 
It is now the ministry of salvation; consequently, it brings us greater responsibility and labor, more dangers and temptations. 
It brings us also but little gratitude or reward in this world; but Christ himself will be our reward if we faithfully labor. 
May the father of all grace help us, to whom be praise and thanks forever, through Christ our Lord. 
Amen.

### FIRST PART.
##God’s Ten Commandments.

#### As they should he Faithfully Taught in the Family.

The First Table of God’s Law—Love to God.

### THE FIRST COMMANDMENT.

I am Jehovah thy God. Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

What does this mean?

We should fear, love and trust in God above all things.

###THE SECOND COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not take the name of Jehovah thy God in vain; for Jehovah will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

What does this mean?

We should so fear and love God that we do not curse, swear, conjure, lie or deceive by his name, but call upon his name in every time of need and worship him with prayer, praise and thanksgiving.

### THE THIRD COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy.
(Thou shalt sanctify the holy or restday).

What does this mean?

We should so fear and love God that we do not despise preaching and his Word, but deem it holy and gladly hear and learn it.
The Second Table of God’s Law—Love to Our Neighbor.

### THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt honor thy father and thy mother, that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth.

What does this mean?

We should so fear and love God that we do not despise our parents and superiors, nor provoke them to anger, but honor, serve, obey, love and esteem them.

### THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not kill.

What does this mean?

We should so fear and love God that we do not hurt nor harm our neighbor in his body, but help and befriend him in every bodily need.

### THE SIXTH COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not commit adultery.

What does this mean?

We should so fear and love God that we live chaste and pure in words and deeds, and husband and wife each love and honor the other.

### THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not steal.

What does this mean?

We should so fear and love God that we do not take our neighbor’s money or property, nor get it by false wares or false dealing, but help him to improve and protect his property and business.

### THE EIGHTH COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

What does this mean?

We should so fear and love God that we do not falsely belie, betray, backbite nor slander our neighbor, but excuse him, speak well of him and put the best construction on all he does.

### THE NINTH COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s house.

What does this mean?

We should so fear and love God that we do not craftily seek to gain our neighbor’s inheritance or home, nor get it by a show of right, but help and serve him in keeping it.

### THE TENTH COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s wife, nor his man servant, nor his maid servant, nor his cattle, nor anything that is his.

What does this mean?

We should so fear and love God that we do not estrange, force, or entice away from our neighbor, his wife, servants or cattle, but urge them to stay and do their duty.

### THE CONCLUSION OF THE COMMANDMENTS.

What does God say of all these commandments?

He says: “I Jehovah thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; and showing lovingkindness unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.”	

What does this mean?

God threatens to punish all who transgress these commandments, therefore we should fear his wrath, and do nothing against such commandments. But he promises grace and every blessing to all who keep these commandments; therefore, we should love and trust in him and gladly do according to his commandments.

## SECOND PART.
# The Apostles’ Faith, or Creed.
As it should be Faithfully Taught in the Family.

### THE FIRST ARTICLE OF FAITH.

#### Of Creation.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth.

What does this mean?

I believe that God has made me, and all creatures; that
he has given and still preserves to me my body and soul, eyes, ears, and all my members, my reason and all my senses; also clothing and shoes, meat and drink, house and home, wife and child, land, cattle and all my goods; that he richly and daily provides me with all that I need for this body and life, protects me against all danger and guards and keeps me from all evil; and all this purely out of fatherly, divine goodness and mercy, without any merit or worthiness in me; for all of which I am in duty bound to thank and praise, to serve and obey him.
This is most certainly true. 

### THE SECOND ARTICLE OF FAITH.

#### Of Redemption.

And in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord; who was conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary; suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried; he descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

What does this mean?

I believe that Jesus Christ, true God, begotten of the Father from eternity, and also true man, born of the Virgin Mary, is my Lord; who has redeemed me, a lost and condemned creature, purchased and won me from all sins, from death and from the power of the devil, not with gold or silver, but with his holy, precious blood and with his innocent sufferings and death; and in order that I might be his own, live under him in his kingdom and serve him in everlasting righteousness, innocence and blessedness, even as he is risen from the dead, lives and reigns to all eternity.
This is most certainly true.

### THE THIRD ARTICLE OF FAITH.

#### Of Sanctification.

I believe in the Holy Spirit; the holy Christian Church; the communion of saints; the forgiveness of sins; the resurrection of the body; and the life everlasting.
Amen.

What does this mean?	

I believe that I cannot by my own reason or strength believe in Jesus Christ, my Lord, or come to him; but the Holy Spirit has called me by the Gospel, enlightened me with his gifts and sanctified and preserved me in the true faith; even as he calls, gathers, enlightens and sanctifies the whole Christian Church on earth and preserves it in union with Jesus Christ in the one true faith; in which Christian Church he daily and richly forgives me and all believers all our sins, and at the last day will raise up me and all the dead, and will grant me and all believers in Christ everlasting life.
This is most certainly true.

## THIRD PART.
### The Lord’s Prayer.

As it should be Faithfully Taught in the Family.

Our Father who art in heaven.

What does this mean?

God would hereby tenderly invite us to believe that he is truly our Father and we are truly his children, so that we may ask of him with all cheerfulness and confidence, as dear children ask of their dear father.

### THE FIRST PETITION.

Hallowed be Thy name.

What does this mean?

The name of God is indeed holy in itself; but we pray in this petition that it may be holy also among us.

How is this done?

When the Word of God is taught in its truth and purity and we as the children of God lead holy lives in accordance with it; this grant us, dear Father in heaven!
But he that teaches and lives otherwise than the Word of God teaches, profanes the name of God among us; from this preserve us, heavenly Father!

### THE SECOND PETITION.

Thy kingdom come.

What does this mean?

The kingdom of God comes indeed of itself, without our prayer; but we pray in this petition that it may come also to us.

How is this done?

When our heavenly Father gives us his Holy Spirit, so that by his grace we believe his Holy Word and live godly, here in time, and in heaven forever.

### THE THIRD PETITION.

Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.

What does this mean?	

The good and gracious will of God is done indeed without our prayer; but we pray in this petition that it may be done also among us.

How is this done?

When God defeats and hinders every evil counsel and purpose, 
which would not let us hallow God’s name nor let his kingdom come, such as the will of the devil, the world, and our own flesh; but strengthens and keeps us steadfast in his Word and in faith unto our end.

This is his gracious and good will.

### THE FOURTH PETITION.

Give us this day our daily bread.

What does this mean?

God gives daily bread indeed without our prayers even to all the wicked; but we pray in this petition that he would lead us to acknowledge and receive our daily bread with thanksgiving.

What is meant by “daily bread”?

All that belongs to the wants and support of the body, such as meat, drink, clothing, shoes, house, home, land, cattle, money, goods, a pious spouse, pious children, pious servants, pious and faithful rulers, good government, good weather, peace, health, order, honor, good friends, trusty neighbors and the like.

### THE FIFTH PETITION.

And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us.

What does this mean?

We pray in this petition that our Father in heaven would not look upon our sins, nor, on account of them, deny our prayer, for we are not worthy of anything we ask, neither have we deserved it; but that he would grant us all through grace, for we sin much every day and deserve nothing but punishment. And we on our part will heartily forgive and readily do good to those who sin against us.

### THE SIXTH PETITION.

And lead us not into temptation.

What does this mean?

God indeed tempts no one; but we pray in this petition that God would guard and keep us, that the devil, the world and our flesh may not deceive us, nor lead us into misbelief, despair and other shameful sin and vice; and, though we be thus tempted, that we may still in the end overcome and hold the victory.

### THE SEVENTH PETITION.

But deliver us from evil.

What does this mean?

We pray in this petition, as the sum of all, that our Father in heaven would deliver us from all manner of evil—in body and soul, property and honor—and at last, when the hour of death shall come, grant us a blessed end and graciously take us from this vale of sorrow to himself in heaven.

### CONCLUSION.

For thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

What does this mean?

That I should be sure that these petitions are acceptable to our Father in heaven, and are heard by him; for he himself has commanded us so to pray and has promised to hear us. Amen, Amen, that is, yea, yea; it shall be so.

## FOURTH PART.
# Sacrament of Baptism.

As it should he Faithfully Taught in the Family.

### I.	What is Baptism?

Baptism is not simply water, but it is the water comprehended in God’s command, and connected with God’s Word.

What is that Word of God?

That which Christ, our Lord, says in the last chapter of Matthew: “Go ye into all the world and teach all the nations, and baptize them into the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit.”

### II.	What benefits does Baptism confer?

It works forgiveness of sins, delivers from death and the devil, and gives everlasting salvation to all who believe this, as the words and promises of God declare.

Which are those words and promises of God?

Those which Christ, our Lord, says in the last chapter of Mark:	“He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved;
but he that believeth not shall be damned.”

### III.	How can water do such great things?

It is not water indeed that does it, but the Word of God, which is in and with the water, and faith which trusts this Word of God in the water. 
For without the Word of God the water is simply water, and no baptism.
But with the Word of God, it is a baptism, that is a gracious water of life and a washing of regeneration in the Holy Spirit; as St. Paul says, Tit 3, 5-8:
“According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit; which he poured out upon us richly through Jesus Christ, our Saviour; that, being justified by his grace, we might be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. This is a faithful saying.”

### IV.	What does such baptizing with water signify?

It signifies that the old Adam in us should, by daily sorrow and repentance, be drowned and die, with all sins and evil lusts; and again a new man daily come forth and arise, who shall live before God in righteousness and purity forever.

Where is this written?

St. Paul says, Rom 6, 4: “We were buried therefore with Christ through baptism into death; that like as he was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also might walk in newness of life.”	

## FIFTH PART.
# Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper.

As it should be Faithfully Taught in the Family.

### I.	What is the Sacrament of the Altar?

It is the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, under the bread and wine, instituted by Christ himself for us Christians to eat and drink.

Where is this written?

The holy Evangelists, Matthew, Mark and Luke, together  with St. Paul, write thus:

“Our Lord Jesus Christ, in the night in which he was betrayed, took bread; and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to his disciples, saying, Take eat; this is my body, which is given for you; this do in remembrance of me.”
“After the same manner, when he had supped, he took also the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it; this cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you, for the remission of sins; this do, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.”

### II.	What benefit is such eating and drinking?

It is shown us by these words: “Given and shed for you, for the remission of sins;” namely, that in the Sacrament, forgiveness of sins, life and salvation are given us through these words. For where there is forgiveness of sins, there is also life and salvation.

### III.	How can bodily eating and drinking do such great things?

It is not the eating and drinking indeed that does it, but the words which stand here: “Given and shed for you, for the remission of sins.”
These words, together with the bodily eating and drinking, are the chief thing in the Sacrament; and he that believes these words, has what they say and mean, namely the forgiveness of sins.

### IV.	Who then receives this Sacrament worthily?

Fasting and bodily preparation are indeed a good outward
discipline; but he is truly worthy and well prepared who has faith in these words: “Given and shed for you, for the remission of sins.”
But he who believes not these words, or doubts, is unworthy and unprepared; for the words, “For you,” require only believing hearts.

# HOW PEOPLE SHOULD BE TAUGHT TO CONFESS THEIR SINS.

### What is Confession?

Confession embraces two parts; one, that we confess our sins; the other, that we receive absolution or forgiveness from the pastor as from God himself and in no wise doubt, but firmly believe that through it our sins are forgiven before God in heaven.

### What sins should we confess?
Before God we should acknowledge ourselves guilty of all sins, even of those which we do not discern; as we do in the Lord’s Prayer.
But before the pastor we should confess those sins only which we know and feel in our hearts.
Which are these?
Here consider your station in the light of the Ten Commandments, whether you be a father, mother, son, daughter, master, mistress, servant; whether in these relations you have been disobedient, unfaithful, slothful; whether you have wronged anyone by word or deed; whether you have stolen, neglected, wasted aught, or done any harm.

# HOW THE HEAD OF THE FAMILY SHOULD TEACH HIS HOUSEHOLD TO PRAY.

### Morning Prayer.

In the morning, when thou risest, say:

In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

Then, kneeling or standing, repeat the Apostles’ Creed and the Lord’s Prayer. Then, if you wish, say also this prayer:

I give thanks unto thee, heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ thy dear Son, that thou hast protected me through the night from all danger and harm; and I beseech thee to preserve and keep me this day also from all sin and evil; that in all my thoughts, words and deeds, I may serve and please thee. Into thy hands I commend my body and soul, and all that is mine. Let thy holy angel have charge concerning me, that the wicked one have no power over me. Amen.

Then after a hymn or the Ten Commandments, or whatever thy devotion may suggest, go joyfully to thy work.

### Evening Prayer.

In the evening, when thou goest to bed, say:
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Then, kneeling or standing, repeat the Apostles’ Creed and the Lord’s Prayer. Then, if you wish, offer this prayer:

I give thanks unto thee, heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ thy dear Son, that thou hast this day so graciously protected me, and I beseech thee to forgive me all my sins, and the wrong which I have done, and by thy great mercy defend me from all the perils and dangers of this night. Into thy hands I commend my body and soul, and all that is mine. Let thy holy angel have charge concerning me, that the wicked one have no power over me. Amen.
Then lie down in peace and sleep.

# HOW THE HEAD OF THE FAMILY SHOULD TEACH HIS HOUSEHOLD TO ASK A BLESSING AND RETURN OF THANKS AT MEALS.

### Grace Before Meat.

The children and servants shall go to the table reverently, fold their hands, and say:

The eyes of all wait upon thee, O Lord, and thou givest them their meat in due season.
Thou openest thine hand and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.

Then shall be said the Lord’s Prayer and after that this prayer:

O Lord God, heavenly Father, bless us and these thy gifts, which we receive from thy loving-kindness, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.

### Thanks After Meat.

After meat, they shall reverently, with folded hands say:

O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy endureth forever.
He giveth food to all flesh; he giveth to the beast his food; and to the young ravens which cry.
The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy. Amen.
Then shall be said the Lord’s Prayer and the following:
We thank thee, Lord God, heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, for all thy benefits; who livest and reignest for ever and ever. 
Amen.

#THE TABLE OF DUTIES FOR THE HOME, OR PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE ADMONISHING VARIOUS CLASSES AND ESTATES OF THEIR OFFICE AND DUTY.

### Duties Hearers Owe Their Pastors and Teachers.

The bishop therefore must be without reproach, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach; not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler, not covetous; one that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity; not a novice.
Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and convince the gain-sayers. 1 Tim 3, 2-6. Tit 1, 9.

### Duties the Hearers Owe Their Pastors.

Eating and drinking such things as	they give; for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Luke	10, 7.

Even so did the Lord ordain that they that proclaim the Gospel should live of the Gospel.	1 Cor 9, 14.

Let him that is taught in the Word communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things. Be not deceived; God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. Gal 6, 6-7.

Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in the Word and in teaching. For the Scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn. And, the laborer is worthy of his reward.
1 Tim 5, 17-18.

And we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them exceeding highly in love for their work’s sake. Be at peace among yourselves.
1 Thess 5, 12-13.

Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit to them; for they watch in behalf of your souls, as they that shall give account: that they may do this with joy, and not with grief: for this is unprofitable for you.
Heb 13, 17.

### Duties to the Civil Government.

Let every soul be in subjection to the higher powers: for there is no power but of God; and the powers that be are ordained of God.
Therefore he that resisteth the power, withstandeth the ordinance of God: and they that withstand shall receive to themselves judgment.
For rulers are not a terror to the good work, but to the evil. And wouldest thou have no fear of the power?
Do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise from the same: for he is a minister of God to thee for good.
But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the sword in vain: for he is a minister of God, an avenger for wrath to him that doeth evil.
Rom 13, 1-4.

### Duties of Subjects.

Render therefore unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s; and unto God the things that are God’s. Mt 22, 21.

Wherefore ye must needs be in subjection, not only because of the wrath, but also for conscience’ sake.
For for this cause ye pay tribute also; for they are ministers of God’s service, attending continually upon this very thing.
Render to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honor to whom honor.
Rom 13, 5-7.

I exhort, therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, giving of thanks, be made for all men; for kings and all that are in high place; that we may lead a tranquil and quiet life in all godliness and gravity. This is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour.
1 Tim 2, 2-3.

Put them in mind to be in subjection to rulers, to authorities, to be obedient, to be ready unto every good work.
Tit 3, 1.

Be subject to every ordinance of man for the Lord’s sake: whether it be to the king, as supreme, or unto governors, as sent by him for vengeance on evil-doers and for praise to them that do well. 
1 Pet 2, 13-14.

### Duties of Husbands.

Ye husbands, in like manner dwell with your wives according to knowledge, giving honor unto the woman, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being also joint heirs of the grace of life; to the end that your prayers be not hindered. And be not bitter against them. 
1 Pet. 3, 7; Col 3, 19.

### Duties of Wives.
Ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands, as unto the Lord, as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord, whose children ye now are, if ye do well, and are not put in fear by any terror. 1 Pet 3, 5-6.

### Duties of Parents.
And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath; but nurture them in the chastening and admonition of the Lord. 
Eph 6, 4.

### Duties of Children.

Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right. Honor thy father and mother; which is the first commandment with promise: that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth.
Eph 6, 1-3.

### Duties of Servants, Employees and Laborers.

Servants, be obedient unto them that, according to the flesh, are your masters, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ; not in the way of eye-service, as menpleasers; but as servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart; with good will doing service, as unto the Lord and not unto men: knowing that whatsoever good thing each one doeth, the same shall he receive again from the Lord, whether he be bond or free.
Eph 6, 5-8.

### Duties of Masters and Mistresses.
And, ye masters, do the same things unto them, and forbear threatening: knowing that he who is both their master and yours is in heaven, and there is no respect of persons with him.
Eph 6, 9.

### Duties of the Young in General.
Likewise, ye younger, be subject unto the elder.
Yea, all of you gird yourselves with humility, to serve one another, for God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.
Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time.
1 Pet 5, 5-6.

### Duties of Widows.
Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, hath her hope set on God, and continueth in supplications and prayers night and day.
But she that giveth herself to pleasure is dead while she liveth. 
1 Tim 5, 5-6.

### Duties of the Whole Congregation.
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.
Herein are comprehended all the commandments.
Rom 13, 9. 

And persevere in prayer for all men.
1 Tim 2, 1.

Let each his lesson learn with care And all the household well shall fare.