#The Three Universal Creeds.

These confessions of the universal Christian Church Luther translated into the German language and explained them for the purpose of proving that he belonged to the true and not to a false church. The Nicene Creed he placed at the end and the other three at the beginning of this treatise. Four editions were printed at Wittenberg in 1538.

German Text:	Wittenberg edition, 6, 122; Jena, 6, 572;
Altenburg, 6, 1255; Leipzig, 22, 102; Erlangen, 23, 250; Walch, 10, 1195; St. Louis Walch, 10, 992.

Although I have, in previous writings on the subject of faith, described at length both its nature and its power, and have not failed to make known my faith and the position I intend to maintain, the devil continues to seek new intrigues against me.
For this reason I have decided, as a matter of supererogation, to issue conjointly the three Symbols, or Creeds, which have been received, read and chanted throughout the Church.
I do this for the purpose of affirming once more that I am at one with the true Christian Church which has maintained these Symbols, or Confessions, to this day, and not with the false, vainglorious church, which is the worst enemy of the true Church, having added to such beautiful confessions any amount of idolatry.
Likewise, Israel joined in olden times to the beautiful, divinely-instituted worship in the temple a great amount of idolatrous worship, conducted in valleys, upon mountains and in groves.
Notwithstanding it claimed to be the true people of God, a claim which did not prevent them from killing and persecuting the prophets, and finally even Christ the Lord himself.

The first Symbol, that of the apostles, is clearly entitled to precedence. Briefly and concisely it gives expression to the elements of the Christian faith, for which reason children and the uninstructed can apprehend it with ease.

The second, the Athanasian Creed, is longer. On account of the Arians, it gives particular prominence to the article on Jesus Christ, and shows that he is the only Son of God and our Lord, who claims the same faith from us as the Father in accordance with the words of the first Symbol: I believe in God *	*	* and in Jesus.

This is the truth which St. Athanasius deals with and establishes in his Symbol, which is to all intents and purposes an apology of the first Creed.

The third Symbol is ascribed to Augustine and Ambrose and is said to have been chanted after St. Augustine’s baptism. Be that as it may, it hurts no one to believe it; in either case it is a splendid Symbol or Confession, regardless of its author. Its form is that of a chant, whereby it is adapted not only to the purpose of a confession of the true faith, but also to that of praising and thanking God.

May no one judge me too severely for rendering the words “increatus, immensus” by “uncreated, infinite” (un-geschaffen, unermesslich). I was quite aware that in our language such words seem inelegant. This is true especially of the meaning which our highlanders attach to the term “ungeschaffen.” But necessity compelled the adoption of such terms; and the fact that such words as “ungeschaffen” may have been misused, shall not divert me from my purpose. Whoever can do better may try his hand; let him see whether he can escape the censor and critic.

##THE FIRST CREED OR CONFESSION

Is that general confession of the apostles in which is laid down the foundation of the Christian faith. It is:

>I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth:

>And in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord; who was conceived of the Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary;
